
EFF CUP folks,

Galois has several ongoing projects relating to the intersection
between cryptography and usability.  Below are several abstracts on
these topics.

Most of these abstracts relate to current system summaries in areas
relating to usable cryptography, but not specifically for secure,
private end-to-end encrypted communication tools.  Rather, they focus
upon complementary systems, or technologies on which such a tool
must rest (e.g., crypto libraries or crypto protocols). Were a prize
offered for such a tool, we may well consider building a demonstrator
in this area via our non-profit Galois Foundation.

Consequently, we believe that our systems:
 (a) provide additional case studies for evaluating usability and
 security,
 (b) we believe that the security and usability of an end user product
 like a secure, private end-to-end encrypted communication tool is
 directly dependent upon the security and usability of the
 technologies on which that tool depends,
 (c) we believe that the usability of developer security tools and
 APIs is as important as the usability of end-user products, and
 (d) we have several tools in hand, and relevant world-class expertise
 available, to help further the goals of the EFF in this space.

We also have expertise in running and participating in contests, as
summarized below.

We'd love to participate in a dialog about our thinking about
usability of these kinds of systems and the EFF CUP contest.

Best,
Joe Kiniry, on behalf of several other Galwegians including Isaac
Potoczny-Jones, Dylan McNamee, Joe Hendrix, Aaron Tomb, and others

---

* Usable and Secure Authentication *

Digital authentication - proving who we are - is a constant necessity
on modern networks. Users are buried under the weight of too many
passwords, and are faced with a conundrum: good passwords are
impossible to remember, and bad passwords are easy to guess. Passwords
are the biggest usability and security problem on the Internet today.

Tozny, a Galois spin-out, replaces passwords with a cryptographic app
on your smart phone, making login both easier and more secure than
passwords. Alternately, use Tozny to augment passwords with
multi-factor authentication.

With modern user interfaces on our mobile devices, Tozny believes that
easy to use, strong cryptography is at hand. Authentication is only
the first step. Once a trust relationship is established,
cryptographic authentication can be bootstrapped into an unlimited
secure communications channel.

A key challenge with the adoption of Tozny in the marketplace is its
usability, both from an end-user standpoint as well as an API
usability one. As such, Tozny, or digital authentication in the
general, is a topic area rich for analysis and a subsequent CUP
competition.

---

* Usable, Verified Crypto Libraries *

Galois develops or uses three key technologies that facilitate usable,
verified systems that rely upon cryptography: Cryptol, F*, and
SAW.

** Cryptol. ** Cryptol is an Open Source domain-specific language for
programming, executing, testing, and formally reasoning about
algorithms that operate on structured streams of bits.  Cryptol
particularly excels at specifying and reasoning about cryptographic
algorithms. Cryptol has been used by the U.S. intelligence community
for over a decade to specify and reason about crypto systems.

Cryptol version 2 is the first Open Source release of the Cryptol
system.  Its purpose is to make rigorous applied cryptography
available to all----whether in government, academia, or
industry---thus we have adopted a BSD license.  Moreover, we advocate
that Cryptol should be used as the foundation for the specification
and verification of past and future cryptographic algorithms
standardized via NIST competitions and other similar activities.

The Cryptol system provides: (1) a REPL for experimentation, (2) a
parser and typechecker for Cryptol programs, (3) an interpreter for
executing Cryptol programs, (4) a validation tool for gaining
confidence in the correctness of Cryptol programs via automatic
randomized testing, and (5) a verification back-end for formally
verifying properties of Cryptol programs through the use of SMT
solvers.

** F*. ** 

F* is a ML-like programming language for the formal specification and
reasoning system for secure multiparty systems. F* was developed by
Microsoft Research with some academic partners and was recently open
sourced under an Apache Foundation license. 

F* permits one to reason about the correctness and security properties
of protocols like those at the core of any secure, private end-to-end
encrypted communication tool. As such, we believe that it use---and
systems like it---is a critical component to evaluating the security
of any system under consideration within the CUP contest.

Consequently, we believe that an important evaluation criteria for the
security properties of any CUP tool is the formal verification of its
protocols *as well as* the code that implements said protocols. Tools
that have one or both of these artifacts should be evaluated in a
significantly better light than those that argue for correctness based
upon testing or peer review, both of which are necessary, but not
sufficient, for guaranteeing the correctness and security of a
high-assurance privacy-preserving communication tool.

** SAW. **

The Software Analysis Workbench, or SAW for short, is a formal
verification tool suite developed at Galois. It is capable of
mechanically, automatically formally proving the correctness of an
implementation against a specification written in a high-level
specification language. Cryptol is one of the specification languages
supported by SAW.

Galois has used SAW and Cryptol to formally verify several
cryptosystems, including pieces of OpenSSL. We contend that
technologies like SAW should be used to guarantee that any CUP winner
actually implements the (formally verified) security protocols it
claims to conform to. Galois, and organizations that Galois can bring into
the competition, have a multitude of tools that can be applied to this
task as a kind of grand challenge for applied verification. We contend
that this is a worthwhile mandatory requirement of any deployed,
trusted, trustworthy privacy-preserving communication system and are
happy to help fulfill this goal.

---

* Usable Secure Election Systems *

An active area of research that is slowly turning to an active area of
development is end-to-end verifiable election systems, known as E2E
election systems in the general. Some of these systems are kiosk-based
and are used in supervised settings; others are internet-based where
voters can vote from home; and still others support vote-by-mail
voters.

A paramount---and as of yet unsolved---challenge in designing and
developing E2E election systems is their usability. Most of these
systems use novel, advanced cryptography to achieve their security
requirements. A small number of these systems use novel-but-awkward
ballot designs and voting procedures. As such, they are generally
recognized as being unusable by virtually all voters, and are thus a
failure in a non-academic sense. Usability researchers who have begun
looking at these systems find that most voters cannot even submit
their ballot successfully, let alone verify their ballot was recorded
correctly, counted correctly, or that the election outcome is correct.

Consequently, E2E election systems provide a high-visibility,
high-impact case study in cryptography-meets-usability, thus are ripe
for gathering ideas about how evaluate such systems in these two
dimensions, as well as represent a potential future CUP prize domain.

---

* Experience from Past Contests *

Galois has organized, participated in, or contributed to several past
international contests. For example, we organized the most recent
Verified Software Competition and we will be organizing the 2015 ICFP
Programming Contest, we have participated in past ICFP and Verified
Software competitions, and we have contributed benchmarks and thinking
to the SAT and SMT competitions. 

As such, we have concrete experience about what kinds of contests
attract large numbers of interested participants, measurable criteria
for objective evaluation of submissions, and the generation of
demonstrators and benchmarks in the contest space.
